The modern testing podcast join your hosts Alan and Brent. I am mindless agile robot. I must iterate
As we talk about software engineering software quality leadership and whatever else comes to mind now on with the show
Hey, I'm having a great day. How are you doing? I'm me too. Let's go
listeners
May recall that listen to our last episode. We went off a little bit on
UI automation, would you say that it's accurate right? I went off that that's ambiguous. I would say we
We allowed our inner passions out
We did we did
Yeah, again, our rats were against UI automation
but we did refer to an enabler of that which is Selenium and
Which to our credit we said was a super great tool
maybe too good because it enabled people to do dumb things and then and then stuff happened and then
We got to here
We did we did and we have a very special guest today
Former works employee. Oh, hold on. Hold on. I have to I have to
Build up to it. I have to create
Drama and I need some swelling music
But by the way episode 103. Thank you. Welcome to the podcast
Former Google employee former ThoughtWorks employee current founder, I believe of
Tapster robotics, but for the context of our episode
We'd like to welcome the inventor of Selenium Jason Huggins. Well, now I can say hello. Hi now you can say hello. Sorry
Yeah, we're super excited to have you here and Brent and I are gonna sit down and let you know
Well, we'll ask questions. We'll interact you seem pretty nice so far
So we're not expecting any dressing down, but we're really excited to have you here. So thank you again for
Coming and talking with us today. Thanks and I suppose as a as a
courtesy to the rest of the world like this lets me
Being a guest on a podcast lets me not start my own podcast
So
Contribute to a proliferation of more things in the world. So what part of the world are you in right now Jason right now?
I'm in Chicago just west of the city and my house in Oak Park. Gotcha
Yeah, so and you are both in the wonderful state of Washington. Yes
No, I was just thinking it cuz Alan
Ordinarily is a fantastic
Technician, I'm sure he could grease the wheels for you. And if you wanted to get a podcast going
Yeah, I think we'd like to start off with and we'll see where the discussion goes
Oh, this is we have no outline which is typical for a B testing. Sometimes we throw a little bit of a
Lean coffee list on the board. But today I just like to start with
You're you listened to episode 102. I did I'd like to hear your reaction and thoughts and
Where we were what you like about it and what you maybe didn't like about it. Got it. So
It's everything you said I think like that the summary is that
The punch lines you were trying to get to at the end
I totally agree with and it's like I there's a certain level of like
A lot of the things that were said just triggered a lot of stories in my mind and I've realized like wow
Like those stories not a lot of people know those stories right like the project where Selenium came from or you know
or various
Things where I realized like oh, yeah
I totally agree with them
Like I was a horrible thing that they you know that the team decided to do or or other times like no
Anyway, it's just like just I just follow the stories and realize like some that context
Wasn't there but I was glad some of the stories got through like the story where the the name came from right whatever anyway
And that I I stumbled trying to remember like I heard this once
I hope this is true. I thought I was ready to edit that out if it wasn't I looked it up
Well, I'm writing right and so I there's this book called made to stick and ironically don't remember much of the book
however, it talks about all the different ways why ideas stick and one of them apparently
Was the the name of Selenium and where it came from
People who were kind of in the trenches for years with testing the fact that it was there to cure or sorry to slay the mercury
Monster, they thought that was very humorous
But and I didn't realize I was following following a long tradition of people very in a pun
Clever way or they think they're clever, you know, like naming something after what they think they're going against anyway
But I stumbled into where I read that I stumbled into this
I think I saw Angie Jones tweet where she kind of oh she was mad at me
She called you out and I was like, oh, oh, well, what is this?
And I saw the whole thread and like wow, this is blowing up and then like wow. Okay, so listen to the whole thing
So yeah to be fair. Yes, I did feel triggered a couple times
We're like, wow, that's a bold statement. But then again, you know, well, there's a certain level of and I backed off
It's I said I and the tweet in question like ever all the listeners have seen it
I said reason I hate Selenium is because people use shitty selectors and really it's not Selenium
It's right what are enabled it and yeah, right
Yes, this conversation could go in a million directions, but
There's one of the things I was just thinking like it's specifically in the context of selectors, right?
For me my relationship with the Selenium project
You know, we started the project in 2004, right? So that's a that's a lot of years
All right, and I'm not day to day on the project anymore. Right Simon Stewart
is the leader of the project now and so I'm just kind of the
The old guy who next to the campfire who just you know has stories sitting in his rocking chair kind of thing like hey kid
Anyway
Right, right
I like can you believe this weird sequence of events where you know that you pushed on this and then all this other stuff
Happened on the other side but um
Yeah, I don't know whether I should just like super stay above the frame
You know super like general or like go in like really nitty, you know, like speaking of horrible CSS selectors
Let me tell you about that story. Anyway
So Jason the first thing I hear is is
Maybe you don't agree with the the details
Or where Alan pointed the finger in his tweet, but it sounds like you agree with this sentiment
Yeah, okay. So I went back and pulled out some quotes because and
Because I wanted to make sure I got this right and the thing was it's like I totally agree with it
But there was like a context that's missing, right?
So
What was one of them?
Is the one where Brent said UI automation is immoral, oh, I like that line
Yeah, I mean, I'm kidding. I don't like that line
Definitely was triggered. I mean I like it in the sense of like yeah very memorable sticky controversial, but let me but more
specifically so
specifically I
Just to make sure I'm not already being misquoted
I said I believe I can make that argument and I stand by that
Yeah
It's like where I think where is that quote there's something about a lot that the the context is
the dev teams and testing teams are separate and
I think you were was it?
Why is your my testing exists?
We have to go through the top layer blah blah. Why is that because that's where that's not what they're paid for
This is because here's the line because there's a separation between testers and developers given those worlds Selenium makes sense
But I'm like no get rid of those worlds and the thing is I totally agree with that punchline
And so that the context that's kind of missing here is that Selenium
Came from a project with no testers or no testing team. We were just developers and
We were trying to get this app out the door
And there's a whole you know
Context of like we didn't have any functional testing tool. We went months with just unit tests and
Like we we we decided after months of headache and frustration a specific very specific technical problems
Where things were breaking in one browser and fixing the other and and Brent you mentioned this like hey in the cross browser testing context
That makes sense. So at the time this was like Firefox and IE I guess six and Firefox before it was even 1.0
It's like point eight. Anyway, so that's so we as a developer team with no testing at no testers
And a separate testing team. That's why we created this tool
And so and I've spent my career like kind of avoiding those situations where there's a separate siloed
testing team and I think maybe like where I felt compelled to kind of like, you know
put up my hand and be on the show because I feel like I'm
You're arguing for a thing that I've actually I kind of feel like I've spent all my time kind of trying to stay in
There like I kind of know about and I feel like you're also in that same spot where there is
Dysfunction and having these separate teams and you're actively trying to avoid that as well and and bring people along saying like doesn't have to
Be this way right? So in that sense, we're like very spiritually aligned, right?
but what I think I see and it's not so much your words, but I think I definitely see this as a trend is
people are forgetting that selenium started as a developer tool like for developers by developers kind of thing and I say that specifically
Because it's kind of an annoying tagline
But it but it's it's ironic that like this cypress team the cypress other the testing tool
They're specifically using that as a marketing tool against so on Amazon like well cypress is this quote-unquote, you know
Real for real developers, whatever. So there's this weird thing where there's this
And and and again like architecturally it's it's literally the implement like everything that was in Selenium one the version that was like 15 years old
Everything about cypress is is how we did that first version and basically I threw it all away and we merged with Simon's webdriver project
Thanks, Lenny. I'm too
So not only like to they don't know their history like they really don't know their history
Anyway, and the marketing line like that was my marketing line
Which is basically kind of like what punks do when they were trying to make some noise, right?
But there's but I got some criticism at the at the very beginning by creators of other testing tools saying that Selenium was
too geeky the only kind of selectors we we see we
You actually kind of Allen you mentioned this like, you know add a unique ID or a data ID
That was the only thing that Selenium supported at the beginning and when people would say that like oh you should support all these other things
Like I was kind of ambivalent like yeah, sure go ahead knock yourself out go do it
But when I use this tool, I'm gonna go in the source code modify it make it so there's ID tags and whatever
so it came from like this really like it was actually like really not a
usable by most testers and
Testing teams and I kind of was actively avoiding kind of working on projects where those like where there was a separate siloed
testing seems it
Scene though is testing. Sorry. Go ahead. No, see and then it got out of control. You lost that
Yeah, I think what happened right is is that the you know, I don't know what metaphor I'm looking for at the moment
but the the
Testers and testing teams are getting kind of pushed out of the nest if you will
Right. I kind of look at it like in two different directions. There's a whole bunch of people
They want to stay employed rightfully so and so they're pushed into writing more code and writing automation and that's kind of where
Where they end up at the Selenium meetups and Selenium conferences because like they're being pushed either pulled or pushed or whatever to like learn this thing
Keep their job. If nothing else like, you know learn automation become a coder and then there's another side where I think it's totally
Fine path, but I think it's it's maybe harder to find
people talking about this and arguing about it conference things like things like that but like a business analyst where you're sitting in a dashboard and
Like you're looking at like Google Analytics or some kind of thing where you're kind of
You're sitting there with a kind of a clipboard and kind of more kind of an as an analysis to maybe figuring out what needs
To get tested you're not writing code, but you're kind of like looking at the system as a whole
I think that's a totally valid track for for testers and I think what's going away is just like people just you know
Sitting there clicking a button, right? And unfortunately those kind of jobs stick around is because
Management in some level thinks that testing is sitting there clicking a button, right?
They put out a job correctly. We need a button clickers actually
So I don't know if you're much of a reader. We just we just met have you heard of
Nancy foregrounds book accelerate. I have not I am a reader, but I have not read that. Okay, I definitely recommend
It's Nicole Forsgren. Is it Nicole? Oh, I'm sorry. Oh Nicole. She she keynoted the
Sauce conference. Oh, you know what? I think I quoted her as Nancy at the webinar yesterday as well
Sorry, it's Nicole Forsgren. I'm just gonna call her dr. Forsgren. I think
So she's spent the last four years looking at
certain constructs
Particularly lean and agile type of constructs, but
It's studying it researching it and this book is sort of the published results of her research
and one of the things that she came out and stated is
dev
owning the the testing and the automation of the tests is
Correlated with positive business outcomes
But interestingly enough
Test owning and maintaining it is not correlated with business outcomes
Yeah, I about ten years ago left a QA job went to dev
I is like like you did not have a testing and I completely from experience
I completely see why right once you have the dev team owning it
they
Don't like like everyone else. They don't like maintaining test automation
And what you find is that they naturally?
build stronger test designs to make it easier for them to
Keep the quality high keep the system moving
Yeah, I guess I I do have to push back just on a little bit like be annoying person here
In the sense of like setting up an us versus them kind of dichotomy there
I feel like I think it gets the clicks and they're in the views
But I think there's I'm kind of sitting there imagining someone who's in that
Testing role and through no fault to their own
Well, so there's there they're there trying to figure out what's what's their kind of next move, right?
If if they're now thinking like oh, wow, okay. My role is not gonna lead to business success
I'm thinking like okay, let's not divide well because you're not don't have the title developer
Like what let kind of like let's find a way to like forget the labels for a second
Like let's actually get to that. Okay, what causes business success, right?
regardless of title or role or whatever like
What can that person do like what's some tangible thing that they so if you have an opportunity?
I'll do a pitch go back and listen to
The A B testing podcast say starting around episode 80. This is actually what the monitor testing principles. What was that number again?
80 80 80 started 80
Vintage. All right. So one of the things that is a big passion for Alan and I is we actually think that the
The world is very rapidly changing. We're seeing a lot of studies that sort of agree with this
it's even more than
what you started talking about earlier where
We see, you know test is a bunch of button clickers, right? It so that's that's been
That's been an issue ever since I've been in this in in this career
But now we're we're seeing the reason why I brought up. Dr. Forsgren's
analysis is it's it's
it will further solidify
The opinion of folks like that because now we have an expert claiming proof of it
So what Alan and I are doing we actually believe that these testers are extremely talented and valuable
People but we do see a we do see a threat
Pending
sometime soonish
And that could be measured in decades, but we see this rapidly accelerating
And so what we're trying to do is reach them and say hey
Start investing yourself start finding a new role
Right you one of my favorite ways of describing this is you can either be the butterfly or you can be the wind
we need
people to to
Recognize that this is a possibility and hey if we're wrong
They've invested in themselves and they've grown themselves if we're right
Then they still they won't be part of the the
Yeah, the colon I guess for lack of a word. I guess we're again where I felt compelled to say hey, okay
Let's talk. I think I had kind of that gist of that again kind of a random metaphor coming out of my brain
It's like it sounded like you were sitting in a cafe in England
Complaining about the croissants and saying gosh, I can't wait to get out of England
Let's get to France and we'll never have to deal with croissants anymore, right? It's like
You know metaphorically so croissants are plenty anyway
And so there's a certain feeling of like I'm sitting here going like I'm sitting in France thinking like wow
I'm surrounded by all these croissants or selenium or whatever my metaphor is I hope it's making sense
But there's a certain level of like you know that these I totally get this whole like
encouraging
Empowering testers, but I guess I'm here to say like selenium is on the other side. I was on the other side, right?
It's it's there and I guess that was the point so I guess the show's over now
I'm working. Okay. Wait, who's the croissant is selenium the croissants?
Once if we can just get rid of the Selenium stuff and get testers into like more like awesome
Like like follow these principles right then then no more Selenium and I'm here to say like well
Actually when you're following all those principles Selenium came out of that environment. Oh, yeah. Yeah, so what I don't
If if if what we said last episode got interpreted that way
Yeah, that's false, but I think but I also kind of agree in the sense of I think this is the true of like any
Dare I say like popular thing right like Selenium's popular, but like so are like PHP right like any kind of popular language or framework or whatever
eventually
There's a lot of low-hanging fruit to make fun of right because there's so many people
Doing bad things with it. And so that there's a certain level of like this is it just it's a big target
So let's let's make sure that everyone listening is on the same page. I think all of us
agree
Selenium is a great tool and I think all of us agree
Several great tools will encourage really bad ways of using them
right
Metaphorically croissants are made with a stick of butter and that'll super spike your cholesterol. So you shouldn't actually eat croissants, but they're delicious
That's what I'm trying to say butter
Well if croissants were originally and by the way the title this episode is going to be the croissants are Selenium
But they're really but they're really bad for you should have you know
It's like saying the croissants are I mean the croissants came out of a place where they were for a certain type of people and
They've been adopted now everyone's eating the croissants and they're eating them wrong
We're eating them all the time maybe is the is the maybe they're eating him too much
Right you're supposed to eat croissants at the proper time and coming out of the environment you built it out of and we'll try
people are what
And our French listeners are going why these guys are so wrong
La la the croissants are a lie, okay
Right before lunch sorry, I guess our argument is that
We're highly aligned on that where Selenium came out of and I think
Developers that use Selenium use it very responsibly and well
Like if you're a developer and you end up best way for me to test this is through the is via the web page
I'm gonna go do this and you end up you would never settle as a developer for you
And yep, this selector looks fine. You would go add an ID for it and make the code look good the problem is is
Mentioned this before is that what's happened is
Selenium is being used as a way for
testers to learn to code to write code to
When working in a silent environment sometimes they end up being totally happy like this is this is the way you do it
You write selectors like this. I just right click and copy out of out of dev tools and I get this thing that looks like
gibberish, but that's how I write my automation and it ends up being super fragile and by
By that automation being fragile
They now have a job maintaining automation and now their entire job is maintaining automation and we think that's a really really bad thing
Right, let me let me add. Yeah, and that's where I think I agree totally agree
So Jason you said that the current the selector model that Alan's referring to
Wasn't a feature when when it was still in your control
Right. I mean if you go back to I think the very first I'm not sure if even CSS selectors were even a spec back in
2004 I know someone's gonna look that up and see when it came out
I wouldn't be surprised like 2007 2008 or something like that at the the moral equivalence or immoral equivalence of CSS selectors
Was XPath at the time that was the first thing that I think maybe one of the next things that came after that
So when I was using Selenium, that's what that's what I was doing and right and me
Batty right and I given your I
Could guess why yeah because it was XPath was like native code in Firefox and Safari and all that all the browsers accept internet
Explorer and so we had to emulate XPath
selector kinds of stuff
We had to use a JavaScript library in IE which meant like I think it increased the time of execution by like a hundred fold
or something ridiculous, right and
Anyway, so like that. Um, can I share a story? Yeah
Got it
So there's this one thing where Alan you were kind of pointing out of like, yeah
Just like well you should use IDs like the one thing I would I felt very triggered was like there's just one time
when I was at Google and I was talking with the Google Maps team and they were using XPath to get
To all of the they were actually they were testing Google Maps obviously
But there were all the map tiles, you know
Like go from one location location to the other and there's all these different kind of how do you test a global map?
Tool is a very specific case
But also there's some crazy corner cases, right and I just went in there as I usually do and say well
If the XPath stuff is working is not working don't use it put ID tags
Everywhere and just test that and they're like if we add an ID tag to every map tile at every elevation
We will increase the storage required for Google Maps by like, you know, five ten X or something
And that was already a pretty big number to start with right? So I realized oh, okay, that's bad advice
And so we could through process of kind of elimination. They realized they had to use XPath
There was no other because they couldn't instrument the code
So, you know, that was part of like one of my jobs when I was there of like to helping them figure out how to
Make things go go faster
No, it didn't cross anybody's mind
Like let's just not test it with so many of our dude
I knew browser testing there was a certain level of like, you know
It's given that we will do this browser testing their specific problem though
Is like because once they run it in IE the tests were taking forever
But they ended up having to get to the closest
Location before you jump into all the map tiles where you kind of get to like its parent
Elements like a div or something like that and then from there then you start navigating
Children and like go forward three steps to go to the left back up one and that's that was there the selector
And it was super annoying. I think the project years later
So anyway end of random anecdote with of Google Maps, but like it's a problem and sometimes you can't really do the right thing
I guess but we jumped to kind of recommending CSS selectors years later because for one under the hood
In whatever version of IE came out. It was also natively implemented
And so if you switch to that we didn't have to kind of shim in a JavaScript library to do that
So like people just naturally moved from XPath to CSS
But but again, either way either of those things are not ideal ideally you would go after some kind of unique tag to make it like super clear
Anyway, but it really came down to like the browser implementations and what was faster over time CSS selectors kind of became faster
But yeah people when they when they start doing kind of like find the parent element go fight go down five children
It becomes very much like a you know
You're telling instructions to someone who's blindfolded like okay turn left go forward three paces turn right like that's yeah, that's ridiculous
Yeah, that won't that won't scale no the thing is is but if you but if you're on the Google Maps team
Then you might have to do that. No no no I mean for every rule
There's exceptions that are valid right and the thing I'm wondering right now
And we kind of did last episode under the assumption. It's dominant, but I think I'm wondering right now is the CSS style
The way everyone automates with with Selenium. No, it's not the way everyone is it's dominant. Oh
Actually, I would love to ask you this so so you were saying like tools can enable like gold or
I forgot to write it down
But basically like you can do an awesome thing or you can do kind of crap right right
But a different kind of tool can maybe add some safety rails there
So it actually kind of prevents the ability to do that bad thing right completely great
So in that context I'm curious like shit was it a mistake to put the CSS selectors in there
Or or it would it be an improvement?
I don't know how to phrase this question
But like if we have an opinion on the correct way to do it or the you know the incorrect way to do it
let's say CSX like yours should should CSS selectors as a
Way of finding elements should that be removed from the tool if it gets abused so much should that be removed?
It can't at this stage because I think whether it's dominant or not
There are I get we all agree that these siloed test teams these separate test teams are not a great way to make software
But I think that's where Selenium is being used a lot and these teams right sometimes the only way for them to
Sometimes they don't even have an option to communicate with the developers and right which is just sad that is very sad yes
Yeah, it breaks my heart. It's sad well though the one I'm more worried about is the one where
where there's a negative relationship between the tests and dev teams and
Dev is not adding the device IDs and we get feedback along those lines
and
Testable says okay. We'll screw you
I'll go with CSS or the style sheet approach and work around the fact that you're not helping us do the right and of course
It's a missed opportunity to ask the question like well should we even have tests at all right or at least at this level
right yes, oh yes, I
Was setting you up for like for you to totally I was setting up the straw man
You didn't take my bait
Well, no I was thinking about it earlier, so I'm gonna ask you this question
And actually this is really good because we can talk about the origins of Selenium again
And and these stories are all great you can just you just tell random stories about Selenium as much as you want
We'll fit them in but the question I want to ask is
Work with development teams using Selenium
my hypothesis and my experience
Anecdotally is that is that when dev teams own those Selenium tests
They're actually very good about writing only the tests they need versus trying to automate everything with Selenium
Which unfortunately these we see more often these silo test teams what they try and do
So how did what are some heuristics he used to figure out what you would test in Selenium, and what you wouldn't
What I would test with Selenium what I wouldn't I used to give a little talks about this and trying to mentally uh you know
Remind myself of all my little slide shows
Um the number one thing would be I think there's like failure modes right that some someone kind of gets super enthusiastic
And they just test anything that moves right so I've got lots of opinions on this
But I can also kind of go back to what we did originally look like why it existed
Jason why would we not test the things that don't move whoa yeah, okay, just broke my brain
I'm gonna ignore that question
So it started as a it really was for from a regression point of view the very specific thing
I call this like this the sine wave of quality where
The the reason why it was basically pencils down screw this we are gonna solve this problem and then Selenium came out of it was
This this dumb little button in Firefox is working and then it and then it someone did something to it forgot
But it was but they would break it in Internet Explorer and so that the bug
Report would be it's broken in IE fix it so they go and do that
They push it in we push it to production and to da of course they've now broken it in Firefox, right?
So the next week we support we put in a bug saying Firefox is broken
This will button in Firefox is broken fix it so they go in and fix it when they test in Firefox
We push it to production and what what happens? It's now broken in IE
So there was this like we were not making any progress and we were regressing, right?
and so I kind of I forced this as a kind of like a no retreat kind of like
sometimes there's a different metaphor like a ratchet like you're kind of moving up and up on like a
Roller coaster, right? It keeps it keeps you from back sledding right? No, I wanted to have
What was that it said sounds like you were on a merry-go-round
Or the caffeine is this finally kicking in? Yeah
the
It was just yeah, right. Oh, right the project felt whatever. It was a circle time is a flat circle, right?
it was very frustrating and so I
kind of went with this observation if you will not an opinion just observing the team collectively that
You tell them to fix it in Firefox to fix it in Firefox because they're good developers, but they're not covering every base
And so we said like let's automate this for one and then to like let
Let's solve it
So so over time over the first couple of months of Selenium kind of being on the project
We were finding little cases like that or we were we were kind of sort of backsliding like we fixed one thing
but we break something over there and so
Initially that basically the test names were kind of tracked to like whatever random
Regression bug ID that they were linked to right and I don't see this actually a lot in a lot of teams
They they kind of are more
Upfront right so here's a feature. Let's what's the automated test for that feature and and there you go
Right. So over time we eventually as new features were being created again because the Selenium project came
there were six months of development before we had any user interface tool, which of course is kind of potentially mind-blowing of like
Like maybe that was a good thing
I don't know like maybe maybe all projects should go six months and then do Selenium tests later if they
Like maybe they're like maybe that's the prognosis like don't do anything day one wait three months and then see if you need it
Right. I don't know. But the other thing eventually we added like new feature tests
but we got a lot of value I got personally as like the project manager of this thing like and
Whatever like I could finally see the team was not backsliding and so kind of a regression testing point of view
But also like in that context of like cross browser regression testing making sure that when you we were specifically doing something on one browser
We weren't inadvertently breaking something on the other side of the room, right?
And I kind of I get value on that but in that bigger context of what you're asking like right kind of
We there was a million other kinds of ways that we could do it
But you know given that we had limited resources be kind of focused on those kinds of tests that we thought were the most useful
When I give kind of this little speech to other people I also kind of say like you're gonna write tests ahead of time
Or actually doesn't matter the context
But if you're gonna like to start from zero, what would you test and one would be like the money path?
I call it right the there's some path
One step one, but whatever you're doing. Hopefully it's making money if it's not
Solve that problem don't go write a bunch of Selenium tests if your startup is the more we automate the more we'll make
right and so like a
Find money somehow, you know either profit or grants or however you want to do it, right?
And then there is a money path, right? So maybe don't spend so much time
writing an entire framework around
You know changing the color settings or your header profile or but what but there is a play a path where people can swipe a
Credit card and give you money and sign up for the thing, right? So if you're gonna start somewhere
Focus on that and then you kind of build things around it. Sometimes there's this metaphor
It's not my metaphor, but very cliche like it's kind of like a paving the cow paths, right?
Where you kind of look where people are going and then that's where you figure out where to put the site the concrete for the sidewalks
I look at that, but it's also like following where where people what like what's the most valuable path through your application and start there
Eventually, maybe over time you you go to the the lesser used paths
But again, if it's kind of a focus developer team, maybe they don't get to it
So you touched on something I want you to set me straight on if needed
probably needed I
Haven't used Selenium in about three years
but the last project I used it on was a project using angular back at Microsoft and
We had and again kudos to Jim Evans for trying to make that ie webdriver work. I think he's done some great work
I'm not sure where that was at the time, but we had a really hard time
With our Selenium tests getting them to run across
Chrome ie Firefox and Safari, right? Yeah
That's unfortunate right because it was started to be that right? So it's like it's not living up to its
Resundetra if that was like in that moment like it needed to be across browser tool
Yeah, cuz that that's where we see
Like the story used to describe like if you want to make sure these elements continue to work right across browsers
Super powerful, but there is a parallel universe here
Like so there's from like a you know, correct way as you like if I'm meditating on that phrase of like they solve the wrong
problem really well, right one way that we could have solved that problem. Well in a completely different way is
John Resig created the jQuery
project right same
Goal was JavaScript is super buggy cross browser
And so it created one API that if you write to the jQuery API
Then you've solved your cross browser problems very elegant solution to the same problem completely different context, right? So like
There's a different kind of recommendation there right is not so much use jQuery, but there's a certain level like find ways
To avoid the cross browser testing problem without necessarily
Throwing all the weight at at the Selenium level or the testing level, right?
Maybe there's a different framework you can use her or just give up quit
Coca-liking across the country and give up all no, I mean
I'm actually thinking so
There's I see a move. I don't know if this is gonna take off
But I see a lot of browser companies basing on
on Chrome now and I and I wonder if essentially
That set sort of standardization is going to keep pushing forward
In to what degree that will eliminate cross, but I I sadly am like
I don't want to speak for you guys, but like
There's a certainly I guess I've I've now at risk of being that guy who's seen this the business cycles
And now I'm in the corner saying we've done this all before like like basically note one
No one listens to that guy
But the person that guy or girl is also totally right right like where everything is a fad
Everything's been done before there's a certain level of like so if nothing else like to your point like there's kind of browser consolidation
Everyone's kind of like choose like go getting on the bandwagon. It's all gonna be chrome
I would look at it saying like well inevitably
Google will become like Microsoft and
realize it has all the power the universe and go super evil and then naturally some Firefox like thing will come out of that and
You know punch the air like shake their fists kind of like it give a brave heart speech and say Google is evil
We're gonna do this other thing and they'll effectively you know
There'll be another 10 years 15 years of the Firefox
There'll be a new Firefox that will fight the old evil chrome like this is like inevitable, right?
so I'm not too worried about chrome like a kind of a monoculture around chrome because if it gets it if it gets too much of
a problem it will then
history will repeat itself and then there will be kind of a
blossoming of a bunch of options for right now we're kind of a consolidation mode and
That's just I don't know. I guess I just look at it
It's like I guess it's maybe a problem, but I'm not so fired up about it
But magically somehow it'll solve itself in 10 years. I guess is what I'm trying to say in hindsight
I'm wondering I have two thoughts in my head. I'll see if I can keep them straight, but one thing I'm wondering is
if those
Selenium tests we had were just I mean they were they were fairly simple, but maybe too complex
Maybe what you want to test there is for cross for cross browser compatibility
I'm wondering if there is some heuristic around writing simple tests and the simpler the test is or the less crazy you try and get
Maybe the more apt that test is to run success. Yeah, I mean, yeah
It sounds like I mean we could you know
Put my you know putting consulting hat on there like a load of dive down and specifically see the lines of code and see that
Like why is it working here and not there? Yeah, and to be generally yes
And there's so much does I tried it and there's so much progress on all fronts on the webdriver projects that it's
No, thanks to me. Absolutely. No, like this is all
All thanks to Jim and Simon and yeah
There's a million other people that are like day to day in the trenches working on the project now the other thing other thought in
My head is because of the Braveheart quote now. I'm wondering if that's where the brave browser got their name from
I don't know
Which Braveheart quote? Oh
I was just I was just imagining my in my mind. I was just imagining a was it I'm blanking out his name, but uh
It's the actor Mel Gibson like just standing on his horse just encouraging people to go into battle and now I can't remember why I was it
anyway, but
Rallying cry. Yeah, right. Yeah, someone's gonna have some rally in Christ and we need to fight these browsers. Whatever. Where were we?
You're asking two old guys. You can't remember where they where they parked their cars
So the one thing that Jason started talking about we might I can just send so many people rolling their eyes listening to this right now
We expected a fight no
The I am the steel I am the top Google search for still caged in I fight by the way
I want to point that out you are why
Well, that's funny story
So it took everyone stop while you're doing Google the phrase steel cage and I fight and the story there was this was the Google
Test automate. I totally cut you off. I'm sorry. No, it's story time
This was the Google test automation conference 2007. So this is Google's second
Test conference and there's a whole awesome
Backstory on even why Google did this test conference for a couple years and some I've got some conspiracy theories in my they stopped doing it
But anyway, I'm not important to the story. So so I'm there in New York City
And I was drafted in to give a talk to replace the speaker at that time
I was a googler I've been there like for six months Simon Stewart was still at ThoughtWorks and I had just left
ThoughtWorks like the year before
He was there to present web driver
And I had seen web driver when we were both at ThoughtWorks a year earlier
And anyway, so I was ready to
kind of like not be impressed
By by his talk and and also there were a lot of Selenium talks at the at G tech and also I was like super
Awkward and weird about it right because I didn't realize it was being used that much
anyway, so I was sitting through Simon's talk and
I realized he had fixed like I'm kind of sitting there with crossed arms thinking like okay waiting to
Take notes and shoot everything down and he had fixed all of the problem every
Conceptual architectural whatever you want to call it idea that I was against web driver and how he did things he fixed all those problems
And it was awesome and brilliant and in an instant as I'm watching his his talk about web driver
I realized this is it. This is the this really is the Selenium killer
Like this is all this is all the things I would wish we could do in a future version of Selenium
So then I had kind of a choice there if like it could either be like my new best friend or I could find some weird passive-aggressive
Way to like super hate on him, right because like he's clearly made the better tech
So this was these were like our presentations, right? The other footnote to history
my talk was I I created an AWS account two days before and
Got access to like 20 machines in the cloud and I wondered if I could run a browser test in the cloud
I thought that'd be interesting and this is like 2007, right?
So that was actually AWS had only been around for maybe six months or a year at that point
So this was like a new thing in the world anyway, so I know to that thing
But the reason why still cajun I fight long story long
They were lightning talks at the very last day
And so I proposed kind of as a way to encourage this
He's either figuring out whether he's my new best friend or my new enemy
I proposed doing a dueling lightning talk where we would both
Talk about Selenium and webdriver as a kind of kind of set it up as a debate kind of it like in
Lincoln Douglas debate or something like that, whatever but with the caveat where I would have to argue
For and against webdriver and he would have to argue or something like for I would have to argue for
Like five reasons why his web driver is awesome. It's letting him is horrible
I that would be my side and then Simon would stand up there and give her five reasons
Why web driver is horrible and something was awesome, right? So we would like flip sides
Arguably, whatever anyway, so the thing was that that conversation and can't believe we went
You know, he went along with it. We did this thing, but there was like a lot of ha ha I'm serious
Kind of conversations of like well, what have we merged projects, right? What if we joined forces?
And so that it kind of started at that
You know GTAC 2007 New York City. That's where web the web driver like the idea of web driver joined this lightning project
Started and it started with kind of like yeah this very
Kind of joke of an idea of like let's do a steel cage knife by where of course it comes out that we're just all friends
No, I knew that was brilliant
Particularly, you know if you felt beforehand that web driver was the better product which is what I heard right? You're like
So I win well done
Well, there was a specific idea that he implemented that
That I kind of like well, that was the wrong idea. Um, there was something in the water like
With there's an older framework idea called fit framework for integrated testing Ward Cunningham more famous for creating
Right, right more famous for creating Wikipedia and though or sorry not Wikipedia, but the wiki
and
But then there was other projects that are out there where they're kind of running with this idea and even with the first version
Of Selenium also kind of ran with the idea for implementing fit
I'm I first might eat one and only maybe email the work Cunningham was like is anyone done fit for JavaScript if not great
I'm gonna go do that right so that that was like part of its tagline and I realized at some point later
Like wow, that was a that was a like a bad idea
To do that, especially if it's a developer tool
Like if you're writing a developer tool for developers, they would rather write in Python or Java or C sharp or whatever
They don't want to write in HTML tables or something like that, right? It's kind of ridiculous
But but there are other frameworks that are still out there
That still use that and when I when I first saw
Simon's first implementation of web driver. He was also you kind of doing that first kind of
User interface or facade into it was like a fit like we had to write your tests and tables and really ah, man
Here we go again
But when he gave that presentation in New York, he got rid of all of that
he just got to like the chocolaty goodness of
the stuff and the
Like just footnote to history
But the specific thing was Selenium one like at that time the state-of-the-art for slam everything was emulated in JavaScript again
Same way the surprise Cyprus is implemented now is all
Injected JavaScript in the browser and Simon solved it kind of at the operating system level where you would ask the operating system to
Click a button or something like that. So as far as the browser is
From the browser's perspective perspective the events were more native
And less flaky or something like that. Anyway, I'm getting super in the weeds here, but
Where were we?
One thing I wanted to mention and then I'll ask for some closing comments from you or quit everything we can get to I
Went to maybe the last I think it was the next to the last
GTAC conference. Yeah, and
Ironically, I'm I may actually be using that word correctly in this case or yeah
I nicknamed it the flaky test conference because every single talk had some flavor of talking about how to deal with flaky tests
Right and I think it's just interesting that came up in my head. Yeah while you were talking
I don't know why you need to I mean, it's one slide just says the word delete
Great what I what I find fascinating was like why Google
Started the that series of conferences. It was the first one was L tack
So it was the London test automation conference Alan Hutcheson
Based in New York or sorry in the London office there
And here's the thing about the whole GTAC conference secretly it was oh
What they were finding was that it's really hard to find people like developers who kind of are interested in testing
So this is a way of like flushing people out in the world of like to self-identify
As like people who are like just totally geek out on this stuff, right? It's really hard to find that that
developer
Test-minded developer if you will so it for a couple years. It was secretly
secretly
Very secretly on the lowdown kind of a recruiting effort for Google
Right at some point the cat was out of the bag and it became obviously a recruiting thing
So why would people then send their employees off to a Google?
Conference to then just be poached and then leave right so once once that was obvious
It was impossible who's gonna who's gonna go if you're not already a googler
Like why would you send your employees there, right?
But there was a good couple of there's some beautiful years there at the beginning where there really wasn't a developer
Really geeky really nerdy in the weeds like let's like just tons and tons of code
developer focused testing conference
the other kind of context here was like I didn't even know when we started Selenium that
Testing was a profession that there were books that there were conferences and all kinds of things like that
so kind of leading like informs and I would only go to developer conference like JS com for or
Pycon or things like that only after a couple years
I finally like once you like testing conferences like star East Star West or
STP con things like that but but Alan was specifically trying to find developer
Test-minded developers if you will and he felt like there wasn't a lot of like real like in the weed
gnarly geekiness like so like to fix a flaky test. Yes, you get the leading in 2007. I completely agree with that
I think I don't was this in back in 2007 like 12 years ago
Yeah, I completely agree with that
right the separation of roles
Was was a big thing at a lot of companies Microsoft still had a same right for sure. They had
Almost 10,000 testers at that time. So finding test-minded developers matter of fact
I think 2007 is even sort of pre the dominance of TDD and and sort of
Design constructs that now are very popular in the industry
So III don't think that world exists today. I wonder how often or to what degree I'm right
I'm thinking again putting myself in the the seat of the listener here
And I'm just thinking like listening to myself tell all these wonderful stories, which I thought was a good idea
Maybe it is. I don't know probably not but I'm thinking like, okay
Was there any actionable thing going forward like okay now we know what the industry was like a couple years ago
Like yeah now what so what okay go eat croissants. That's the moral
So actually yeah it so it's time for us to close but why don't you
Here's a suggestion Jason wanted to what's your
What's your do you have any regrets around how selenium is being used today?
Or do you have any guidance around how so again I mentioned I think I can make an argument
It's immoral or it's UI automation to some degree is immoral and
Yes, that's hyperbole, but I think all three of us know that that that that is
Non-trivially true when we look at it from a business context
Anything you want to mention on that regrets like is there one thing if you had an audience to tell testers?
Hey, please stop doing this with my baby. What would you want to say? Oh?
Man, and that's gonna be anything. It doesn't have to be
Even related to what we talked about today. I guess I would just say web testing is just so yesterday
It's all about robots right now
Really I you know I've got I've got a lot to say on that stuff
I mean, I don't know how to put a bow on that. There's a certain level of like
I'm that dangerous engineer who you know that whole like you know they spend so much time figuring out how they can do it
They don't spend enough time deciding we're figuring out you're spending enough time thinking about whether they should right I put myself in this role
where it's like
Where I look I get motivated when someone tells me something is impossible
Selenium came from a time where people said it is impossible to test JavaScript right?
I rejected that and so Selenium came from like the massive motivation was like tada here
It is here is a tool that can you can use to test JavaScript right? I wanted to win that argument
It's a completely different argument, but it needs to happen on whether you should I want to kind of take off the table
You shouldn't do it because you can't do it. I feel like that is
Not a great argument it can it can shut down conversations for sure
But I don't like that I would like I would rather encourage people to say assuming we can do it and assuming we can totally
Do it well we can solve that problem really well
You know should we be solving that problem right and you just like fine like and this is where we totally agree like find that higher level
Above the browsers like should we be writing a web app should it be a mobile app should we be making an app at all?
right
Like try to find that and maybe some of these decisions kind of come out of it. So you mentioned robots
One of one of our listeners asked the question on select the other day and one of the opinion. Hey
Specifically do we think AI is gonna kill Selenium?
Hmm now I
essentially said a very long worded version of
Not any time soon right, but what's your thoughts?
So this is interesting
No, I don't think it will because it's like an overhyped word that like means everything and nothing right now
So like there's no way anything could possibly live up to this hype right unless by killing Selenium
It kills, you know half the planet and therefore
Some kind of like doomsday terminator scenario or like well. Yeah, technically as an afterthought afterthought, right it after effect whatever
So a couple years ago
I I had this idea and I guess I didn't think to put AI in the word of it because it wasn't this buzzword thing
But I thought like you know
What definitely needs to stop happening is people spending their whole day staring at a at the Selenium API and trying to figure out?
How to craft the perfect test and I thought it would be more useful use of time
To maybe look at Google Google Analytics political data see where like basically that's that cow paths metaphor
Find where people are going which kind of means like put stuff out in production and see how people are using it and then
Use that to inform how you should test but then take it one step further
If it now like if there's like this path that's emerging because you've kind of instrumented things
Why don't you just have that spit out the Selenium test suite for you, right?
It's effectively converting a log file to a Selenium test and then taking it one step further like not even like doing anything with like you
Could stop there and say okay download your Selenium test suite and install it into your CI
But how about you go one step further beyond that and it automatically runs basically today's production code against
like the the mod of the your newest version that's in
Source control, but you haven't pushed to production yet
Right and so you then you start doing kind of like a an A B test if you will of like, okay
You know production we had roughly this number of paths to sign up for credit cards and whatever run all effectively this log data against
our production candidate and as long as things aren't grossly out of bounds then that's like it vaguely seems like we we've
tested things like we haven't broken anything and
push that to production and it basically get to a point where no one opened an IDE and
Look at the Selenium or the web driver API and wrote a test like the system wrote those tests there is
There is a patent out there. It's called. I thought I was rather clever analytics driven development. So I patented ADD
And it's this idea that you would take you take this analytical data and
You would generate test cases and then use those automatically to test your stuff that's out there
And I would argue that well, that's like a machine learning algorithm that that is AI
And and so does that kill Selenium? No like under the hood you would still have some
Automation engine that would run steps that automate a browser
So that doesn't go away and if anything else because humans screwing it up does
Yeah, maybe but you're gonna screw things up in awesome new ways
So it ends up being like like all like all technology
it will now be like pushed down into a lower level of the stack that we're like barely aware of and
You know, there's these metaphors about like, you know leaky abstractions or something. It'll be something like we're
Almost like compiling to assembly. It's it's there someone super wants to geek out
They might have to pop the hood and go down there
But people will be spending all their time kind of manipulating
machine learning kind of data sets of like
Oh, how do we replicate production data before we before we push to production like oh, well, let me find
There'll be all these arguments about how do we basically coach?
Her again from a cow paths metaphor. How can we maybe?
Heard these virtual animals whatever you want to call it. How can we modify?
How do we create these data sets? How do we encourage this AI that is like almost like an?
Not so much an artificial intelligence that can go back in time and kill us
But maybe like it's like a puppy or or some sheep
Like how do we modify these AI things into kind of testing their software the way we want them to?
But under the hood the engine that it will be doing to do its thing will be on a more webdriver, right?
But will people be writing Selenium tests?
Like I'm not convinced that people will be but they'll need to be able to read them because if the AI spits out
Total garbage someone will have to go in there and fix it just like today someone somewhere has to go into
Source code and modify cobalt because like the IRS or say social security like couldn't print checks last week
Like that code's still there, but most the time you don't care about it. It'll it'll hopefully just work. So maybe
Maybe Selenium future is that it's like it's it's like cobalt. It's everywhere, but you don't care until you don't get paid
So I'm gonna tweet that right now inventor of Selenium says it's just like cobalt
All right
Thank you. Yeah. Yeah these this been awesome having you on I love the stories
I think we're it's good to hear that it's good for you not to yell at us and and
Find some agreements there and and point out our hyperbole. We appreciate that but yeah
Fantastic, thank you so much for volunteering to be on our show. Thanks
All right. I'm still Alan and I'm Brent. Oh, I'm Jason Huggins
Thanks, everybody. We'll see you next time. Bye